hey everyone Laszlo Montgomery again
here with another China history podcast
I was thinking of this third episode of
her little cultural revolution overview
that at least we'd get through 1966 and
into 1967 but that ain't gonna happen
today 18 days is all we're advancing in
this episode August 1966 civil rights
movement in the u.s. revolver was
released John London made his famous
apology for saying the Beatles were
bigger than Jesus Vietnam War under LBJ
was heating up yet all those devastating
earthquakes that month in Turkey in
August 1966 in China Mao is going to
unleash this monster he created called
the Red Guards this is when it all
starts this is when those massive
rallies and Tiananmen Square start to
happen parts 1 & 2 of this series sort
of gave you a general idea about how
this whole thing got set up and how all
the groundwork was laid now it's time
for Mao Zedong now pushing 73 years old
to show off and get in front of his
millions of adoring fans and show
everyone he could still shake it a few
times now is when one of the all-time
great historical displays of megalomania
caught on film at least is about to go
down for all to see and enjoy in the
last couple episodes we saw how he
silenced his critics stuff the halls of
power with like-minded individuals and
now he's playing with fire thinking he
can kick up this massive dust storm and
at the same time keep everything under
control he's gonna launch the Chairman
Mao's show and although he never lived
to regret it he sure figures out it's
easier to create chaos than to rein it
in August 1966 is when the gathering
Thunder clouds start to turn the scary
gray black color an ominous blasts of
lightening begin to appear that presages
this violent storm not seen in China
since who knows when and so this
man-made disaster Mao's second in less
than a decade starts to take off let's
pick up where we left off last time
during a
rally held at the Great Hall of the
People we're joined live Don shellping
and Leo xiaochi knowing they better
start currying Mao's favor or else
appear before a crowd of 10,000 or so
mostly students teachers and they try to
appear as contrite as possible and
explain what this whole cultural
revolution is all about but as they try
and explain themselves and not very
coherently I might add mile walks on
stage it steals the show and sucks all
the energy out of the Great Hall the
crowd went crazy as the Chairman hit the
stage Leo Shao Qi and dung begin to get
a sense that they are now dead men
walking Mao is obviously dissing them in
a very unflattering way that was July
29th 1966 and now let's begin today's
episode in the unforgettable month of
August in the year of the fire horse
1966 now comes the time to get
everything about this mass campaign
organized and to define the whole
purpose of this great proletarian
Cultural Revolution thing Mao does this
on August 1st and 2nd with what soon
became known as the 16 points though
officially it was known as the decision
concerning the great proletarian
Cultural Revolution I won't name them
all but this document serves as the
playbook for the Cultural Revolution Leo
and dung get unceremoniously pushed
aside they didn't lose their jobs at
least not yet but Mao is very publicly
marginalizing these party leaders at
this point the central Cultural
Revolution group is the ultimate
authority in China they're calling all
the shots all the work teams those last
bastions of control the last line of
defense to prevent all these hot-headed
teenagers from becoming an
uncontrollable mob itching to go crazy
and create havoc wherever they went they
were called back the only thing standing
in between some semblance of social
order and utter chaos were these work
teams every last one of them is read
called and Mao and his gang just dumped
all over them and there follows all this
criticism self-criticism and by dumping
on the work teams like he did it was a
classic case of the good old jurors song
my high point at the mulberry tree to
scold the locust this is an old Chinese
saying going way way back how far I have
no idea but it means pointing one thing
but actually what you're doing is
attacking something else that locust is
parked on that tree branch and you're
pointing at it and telling it to bugger
off but what you're really doing is
pointing at the tree so Mao was pointing
at the complete and utter failure and
incorrect behavior of these work teams
but what he was really doing since Leo
had already admitted responsibility for
them was pointing a finger squarely at
him so what's Myles next move he calls a
plenum this is gonna be the 11th plenum
of the 8th Central Committee and for
your information the current Central
Committee in power today is the 17th and
later on this year the 18th Central
Committee is gonna be named this plenum
called by Mao had no quorum so I guess
you could call this a a rump Central
Committee it was packed with miles kind
of people committed leftists and
opportunists or perhaps both nians for
example she too participated as a member
if that gives you any idea about the
credibility of this body
she was the Peking you professor who
wrote that first dots of ball at this
time in China you really had to put your
thinking cap on nothing like this had
ever happened at least its liberation in
1949 so everyone had to think fast on
their feet in August of 66 to analyze
how best to either exploit the situation
for their own personal gain or how best
to survive and get through the worst of
what was surely to come this 11th plenum
it met from August 1st to 12th this is
where Chairman Mao draws a line in the
sand and spells it out clearly that this
mass movement is tasked with rooting out
all this revisionism this shell junk
Julie all around them
and the masses were going to be fully
empowered to carry out class struggle
against all these intellectuals
government officials and party members
with the express purpose to weed out and
here's the most key phrase again quote
those in authority taking the capitalist
road and pretty soon we'll see who the
number-one person in authority is who
takes the capitalist Road will also get
to see who gets labelled the number-two
guy I could be a hint we featured him in
an eight part series here at the China
history podcast it was Leo Shao Qi who
gave the opening speech at the plenum
and if Mao heard anything he didn't like
or that he doubted he would interrupt
low-mid speech now he was Chairman Mao
and all the normal rules of society and
politics didn't apply to him but
nonetheless this definitely was a
breakdown into quorum can you imagine
when Chou Paul speaking before a plenum
assembly and who Chien tal interrupting
him with all these sarcastic remarks
this 11th plenum was no normal session
know at this point already knew his fate
was sealed and at this saree point Mao
was just toying with him Leo criticized
his poor judgment and handling of the
work teams he took full responsibility
for that and then Mao said 90% of the
work teams made mistakes and standing on
the side of the bourgeoisie thus
opposing the proletarian revolution so
here he was pointing at the work teams
but scolding Leo Shao Qi for his
dictatorial ways and how he handled
everything with the work teams this was
a terrible time for Leo Shao Qi and it
only kept getting worse for him Mao had
written a letter to the middle schools
that were attached to Ching hua
University if you recall the very first
units of what became known as red guards
were formed there maurits them a letter
in response to their dots of all that
they had sent him it said long live the
proletarian revolutionary spirit of
rebellion they asked for reply and they
got it Mao wrote back to them quote you
say it is right to rebel against
reactionaries I enthusiastically support
you in this letter this is where Mao
famously says it's all fan yoli to rebel
is justified
so if you
looking for some kind of endorsement
from high up what more can you want this
was one hell of a blank check
Mao is giving these students even
premier Joe and like who always knew the
right thing to do
went to a rally at Ching hua University
on August 3rd there he remarked on their
revolutionary zeal and rebellious Ness
and he tells them he should learn from
that and he saluted them
so if premier Joe is saying this
everyone else knew they better stand in
that line this was all pretty drastic
stuff yet they were still those in the
Central Committee who hadn't totally
lined up on the side of the cultural
revolutionary group it's the plenum went
on Mao saw there were still members
sitting on the fence with respect to you
know how far to go with this and Mao saw
this lip-syncing going out and was
increasingly frustrated that these guys
didn't come down off the fence and join
in with total and complete enthusiastic
support Mao must have been thinking how
much clearer do I have to be with these
guys before they get it they were still
those at the plenum who agreed with Mao
but felt he had really gone too far and
what he seemed to be calling for was
perhaps a little bit too risky and
dangerous
he was really playing with fire saying
that the things he was saying so they
showed their support but they didn't go
far enough and Mao saw us at a Standing
Committee meeting on August 4th Mao
pounds the table and minces no words
when he tells the assembled group quote
this so-called mass lied this so-called
faith in the masses this so-called
Marxism Leninism it is all fake and has
been for years what we have here is
suppression and terror and this terror
originates from the party center judging
from the present suppression of the
great proletarian Cultural Revolution
activities of the students I do not
believe there is any real democracy or
real Marxism what we have here is
standing on the side of the bourgeoisie
to oppose the great proletarian
revolution because the party center not
only has not supported the movement of
the young students but in fact has
suppressed the student movement and to
get to underscore this accusation Mao
finishes off by saying quote I am of the
view that something has to be done then
the leader of the crg the Cultural
Revolution group and Botha
he spoke next and he followed up with
one of his usual scathing attacks on the
party establishment in his remarks he
totally slammed Leo xiaochi and you know
Mao would occasionally chime in with his
agreement well as I mentioned in part
one the next day August 5th 1966 Mao
follows up with a thunderbolt like only
he could do and on that fateful day he
issues his own dots of the bow his first
big character poster and it's entitled
bombard the headquarters Pal da Celine
boo you know this this is in the middle
of the plenum you know these are usually
pretty calm and scripted meetings so
with this act Mao said the whole Beijing
government is fair game Mao had called
in limpio to attend this meeting Lin the
hypochondriac was convalescing in Dalian
and but he dutifully goes to Beijing to
join in on the denunciations of Leo Xiao
Qi Mao wanted Lin to give a speech and
really give it a low and give it to him
good soul in not a very literate man nor
was he a captivating speaker he asked
Mao you know exactly what he should say
so my calls in the same major general
who scripted the denunciation of laurie
ching and he had him write the speech
for lin and lin bill gave this speech
and he puts Leo Xiao Qi through the
shredder a few times and Lin being the
opportunistic toady that he was who
always knew what the Chairman wanted to
hear followed up by saying quote turn
the world upside down be noisy and
boisterous blow Tempest and make big
waves cause major disturbances and lots
of trouble to the point where for the
next six months
only the bourgeoisie but even the
proletariat will be unable to sleep so
Mao made it official that to rebel was
justified and to bombard the
headquarters I guess if you're some
teenager it should to get out and smash
things up and get some anger and
frustration off your chest what more do
you want
three days later the sixteen points are
broadcast to the nation and it becomes
the official charter for the Cultural
Revolution the plenum ends on August
12th with the new lineup for the
Standing Committee announced in order of
rank they were of course Mao number one
Lin B are now officially number two
chillen Lai Chau Chu Chen hua dum Xiao
ping still barely hanging in there at
number six Kang jung-ho Xiao Qi now
ranked 8th Judah leafwich wooden and
Chen Yin
Olympia was the only one given the title
of vice chairman and was made Mao's heir
apparent Lin was also made a vice
premier but you know being a military
man and all he didn't really get
involved too much in affairs of State he
was purely a political animal next order
of business was to clean up the
so-called five big departments that were
crucial to party daily work these had
all been the strongholds of the party
establishment the propaganda department
united front department departments of
organization international liaison and
the central investigation departments if
you weren't lined up on my side you were
out so these departments are all gutted
and stuffed with Mao people all
committed loyal leftists interestingly
it was Joe and Lai whom I'll put in
charge to oversee the central Cultural
Revolution group maybe he figured he had
to have an adult supervise these kids
who are always fighting and up to no
good
Joe had to walk a fine line between
showing Mao he was totally on board and
at the same time keep the state from
going over the edge of the proverbial
cliff Chen hua was actually the one
officially in charge of the group with
young king is the deputy director so
what could go wrong right
the crg with these two in charge and
Kong Chung who by the way was still
getting high on opium at this time he
was the adviser to the group
this was command central as far as the
whole Cultural Revolution went the party
Secretariat led by Deng Xiaoping at the
time had always been the organization to
carry out all the important stuff but
now it was shunted aside and anything of
importance came directly from the crg
they set themselves up in some nice digs
namely the gaol youtai guesthouse villas
this compound was where visiting heads
of state or international guests were
placed they spread themselves out in
seven of these villas John Chiang and
number eleven kang chung and lucky
number eight
Chen hua number 15 villa at number 16
was where they had the main office of
the crg and number 17 served as a sort
of a clubhouse for this whole motley
crue villa 17 was where Cheng Cheng
housed her precious movie projector and
where she famously screened all these
western movies that she loves so much
did anyone else been caught watching any
of these movies they would have met with
a grisly and unfortunate fate now
whether or not the crg members believed
in all these leftist rants is hard to
say they might have all believed in all
this leftist propaganda to one degree or
another nothing out trumped their
ambition and quest for personal power
and the way you got this was from your
association with mal Jung Chang and Kong
Xiang perhaps being the best examples of
this but man this see Archie was a total
nest of vipers and many of them couldn't
get along they were supposed to be
running things in the country but
between all the backstabbing and even
purges going on within the group it was
hardly what you would call an effective
government bureaucracy let alone a
decision-making body
Kong Hong and Chen Botha famously hated
each other they never agreed on anything
and Chen hua who was nominally in charge
he couldn't
along with Jill and I either there was
endless internal hostility in this band
of brothers injunction and now that mal
had recalled the work teams beat down
his political rivals and told all the
red guards they had carte blanche to
attack anything they wanted and smashed
anything and everything that fell under
thee very broad umbrella of the four
olds the so Jill
old habits customs culture and ideas
they did what I guess any angry and
dissatisfied youth would do they went on
a rampage and Mao was quoted in saying
once quote this man Hitler was even more
ferocious the more ferocious the better
don't you think the more people you kill
the more revolutionary you are so with
Mao in this kind of frame of mind the
so-called Red Terror began that ran for
a couple months
August September 1966 on August 6th the
day after Mao unloaded his thoughts of
Bao encouraging the Red Guards to
bombard the headquarters there was a
rally held a Beijing workers stadium
word had gotten out that there were a
bunch of hooligans out there posing as
red guards smashing things up roughing
up people so a bunch of these so-called
faux red guard hooligans were rounded up
and struggled on stage and they were
roughed up really bad in front of you
know the 70,000 people assembled on that
day and the red guards thought these
guys were giving them a bad name right
out of the starting gate so they had to
be made an example of
so with seventy thousand people watching
this it's sort of set the tone moving
forward that anything goes and there
weren't gonna be any limits as far as
how far you could go and your
denunciations of counter revolutionaries
and in the violence carrying out in the
name of defending Mao or the cultural
revolution one of the key things to know
about the Red Guards they were not one
single cohesive unit or organization
there were factions galore and many of
them had different reasons to become a
Red Guard how they got involved and how
they looked at the chance that the
Cultural Revolution gave them depended
on what their background was some were
rich some were
or some educated some not they weren't
all students there were workers too you
also had the elite Red Guards they were
better than anyone else because they
were the wisest and because of their
parents political connections and
familiarity with party politics they
were more savvy and you know about how
to behave and what to call for if you
were an angry youth in August 1966 your
moment had come
schools were all not in session so no
one went to any classes or had to study
except study mouths sayings and thoughts
this was the ultimate opportunity for
many dissatisfied youths and there were
several kinds as I said you know there
were students basically dissatisfied in
Angra because they got caught on the
wrong side of the status quo they had no
guanxi and because of that their chances
of advancement up the ladder in China
were slim and none
and those teens whose parents were from
the black categories you know maybe
former KMT anti-revolutionary capitalist
landlord intellectual whatever they
couldn't get anywhere either they were
stuck in society with whatever they got
and boiling in that pot also were
millions and millions of disgruntled
youth originally from the cities who
over the years had been sent down to the
countryside and couldn't get back into
the city so they were cut down in the
prime of life having to accept whatever
meager hope for a good life their lot in
life would get them they couldn't get
their city who called back and back in
1966 that meant basically a life of
monotony without much hope for getting a
piece of the China dream not everyone
went to college in China so you also had
a vast pool of 18 19 20 something year
olds who were already working dead-end
jobs and they knew it
these young industrial workers and then
later any worker with an axe to grind
they too saw their moments to rise up
and express themselves they too were as
angry and dissatisfied in life as the
next type I've already explained
they were where they were because of the
system that put him there and kept them
there and now they were handed their
chance to push back against the system
and all these kids I mentioned forget it
the chances of any of them
ever getting into any of the middle
schools that got you into the elite
universities no chance if you weren't
related to some top party cadre or
military officer you didn't have a
snowball's chance in hell of getting
into any of those schools that served as
the incubators the that the prep schools
for the next generation of government
officials of party elites and everything
began and sort of evolved right in the
Capitol in Beijing some Red Guards
stayed in Beijing many hit the road and
went all over China preaching their
particular gospel and rubbing elbows
with other like-minded Red Guards and
also fighting with those who didn't see
eye-to-eye with them but Beijing
remained the center of gravity for the
whole red guard movement and this was
one strong gravitational force by the
end of 1966 more than 11 million Red
Guard youth had converged on Beijing
from all over China they came Red Guard
groups they rode the trains for free for
fed housed taken care of courtesy of the
PLA Lin Biao stronghold and at Ching hua
the center of the center they were
already more than 7,000 students from
the provinces squatting there and
sharing the moment with their luckier
and perhaps more revolutionary Ching hua
brothers and sisters well right from the
start even the Cultural Revolution group
knew they had a tiger by the tail they
saw how fast this thing was starting to
catch fire and and before long it might
not be so easy to control if anything
had the potential to turn into a massive
angry destructive mob this was it some
of the group went to Mao and said you
know we should tell these squatters at
Ching hua to go this really can't be
good but Mao said forget it he insisted
they stay and let whatever is gonna
happen
happen furthermore Maori marked that all
these students teachers law by Shing
everyone coming to Beijing should be
allowed to see their leaders the reason
Leninism perished is because no one ever
got to see Lenin
so Mao said let as many as possible come
to Beijing and he said let's hold these
rallies and then Mao said we could
mingle with the masses and you know
China will be transformed and so it was
August 18th 1966 the first of eight
rallies was held in Tiananmen Square a
place where you could really pack them
in you'd get close to a million people
all in one spot that's ten Wembley's
everybody ten rose balls ten camp news
all chanting and screaming slogans and
getting caught up in the moment at this
first rally khun Xiang stood there on
the gate of heavenly peace the very
place where miles stood to declare the
founding of the nation Cong stood there
next to Mao as a million or perhaps more
mostly young people shouted out their
adulation for the Chairman and all he
stood for I introduced Cong Chun back in
one of the earliest China history
podcasts other than being a discerning
collector of art and books he really was
a bad guy from almost any way you looked
at him and here he was standing next to
my at this first rally of the Cultural
Revolution this was one of his finest
hours what did Mao feel at this moment
a little over a month before on July
16th
he had swum the Yang's ax symbolically
making his historic comeback he was
coming back to teach everyone that this
whole communism socialism thing was for
real and while he had been gone from the
capital they had been forsaking it and
he was going to shake things up he
didn't like to see how China's leaders
and institutions have become static slow
bureaucratic capitalistic he saw this
and he also saw how he himself miles the
dome wasn't being respected ma was not
what you would call a healthy
73 year old guy he saw his own impending
mortality and he didn't want to go down
in history as the guy who launched the
Great Leap Forward he couldn't stop
thinking about what Khrushchev did to
Stalin and he was certain the same thing
was about to happen to him
Mao made up his mind that all these
parties stalwarts now running the
country and the CCP old comrades are not
he didn't want to take any chances that
they or their minions might rewrite
history and give him less than all the
glory and credit he deserved and
demanded and just to clarify Mao didn't
actually swim across the yong-su that is
he didn't swim in the conventional sense
you know breaststroke crawl backstroke
whatever Mao had his own patented
swimming method where he sort of stood
almost straight up and just sort of
propelled himself from that vertical
swimming position i watched the old
black-and-white footage on youtube of
mall in Wuhan you know joining in that
annual swim across the answer
you know Maui floated on his back too
and he was thoroughly enjoying himself
I'm sure in the images and later
propaganda posters of the post swim Mao
on the boat and his white bathrobe you
know waving man this was political
theater its finest and now just a month
later here he was standing in front of a
million law by Shing all
enthusiastically chanting his name and
wishing him long life he must have liked
the feeling because he had seven more in
the next four months from mid-august
late November 1966
what did Mao feel as he walked out onto
the very podium at tienen men were only
17 years before he had declared the
founding of the nation what was going
through his head as he stepped forward
and the crowd roared out his name he
wore a green army uniform that day it
had been a while since Mao dressed in
this way the rally lasted for about six
hours a select group of red guards had
been chosen to meet with Mao and you
know do a photo op for the people's
daily and whatnot
the way it worked was Mao would mingle
with them and they'd have their little
jelly Oh together their little chitchat
and Mao would say a few things that
would be quoted and you know that would
you know become national policy just
like that
crg photographers would get it all on
film and extract maximum political value
from you know whatever shots were
released but the way it turned out it
was another one of those signature
events of the Cultural Revolution
you know Mouse swim the little red book
nuances dots Obamas doubts about saying
bombard the headquarters and how comes
another unforgettable moment of the
Cultural Revolution they had all these
commemorative red silk armbands made
that these you know select chosen
students all wore and they had the words
home waiting on it this is Chinese for
red guard
now once these chosen ones got to meet
Mao and do the mingle thing with them
something Ben one of the students there
pulls out a red guard arm van and puts
it on mouths royal arm which you know he
accepted enthusiastically and on that
day Mao became the supreme commander of
the Red Guards and just an aside some
being been you know whose name meant
polite gentle refined you know Mao asked
her name and when he heard this he said
oh no your name should be some Yahoo
Yahoo which means beat to be violent so
for a while at least she became known as
some Yahoo and of course Lin pyeongchang
were there joining in on the great
moment beaming loving being at the
center of attention
urging on these adoring youth to smash
the the four olds when Mao appeared
before the assembled multitude with that
red guard armband on that was about as
rock-solid an endorsement as one could
hopefully dream for if he hadn't made it
clear yet that nothing short of maximum
revolutionary zeal with no boundaries
was to be carried out the symbolic act
of
while putting on the red armband truly
put eight exclamation points after
everything he had said up til now if the
red guards and anyone else with the urge
to practice destruction rather than
construction needed more legitimacy than
this there wasn't anywhere else in the
universe to get it and that my lovable
listeners is where we are going to put
the bookmark back in for now once again
when I started working on part three of
this series I thought for sure I'd at
least finish off 1966 but there's so
much going on at this early stage I
suppose I should count myself lucky that
we got as far as this first rally when
we come back next time the evil forces
led by Kong Chun are going to make their
move on Leo Shao Qi and we'll see
China's head of state fall victim to all
his enemies in the central Cultural
Revolution group John Chiang always
hated this guy in his glamorous wife
China's first lady Wan Guang Mei she of
such class and impeccable taste they're
all gonna get theirs in the next episode
so I do hope you'll stick with this all
the most horrific aspects of the wen hua
taka me her just about to go down here
in the second half of 1966 and into 1967
a few things before I go John and
Michigan brought something interesting
to my attention go check out to be great
Jeremy Gould corns blogged on Wacom for
not only a vast pool of info on Chinese
culture and happenings but also for a
series on Leo Jin's understanding China
through comics which introduces all
kinds of history and culture using the
medium of comics it's great I'll put the
link on my website and of course let me
rave once again about the latest Sinica
podcast these guys never ever disappoint
I only wish it was a daily show Kaiser
gua Jeremy Gould corn and this time the
occasional guest David Moser in this
latest show on May 24th they have Victor
Mehran and this one is a keeper he's
called the Indiana Jones of China and I
urge you to give this particular Seneca
podcast a listen and find out why I
always rave about this podcast you get
to you get to hear a little about what's
going on in China from people who have
lived there for years speak Mandarin
fluently know what they're talking about
and couldn't be more articulate and how
they present it I get thank-yous from so
many of you for turning you on to this
gem on the internet i'm reading paul
frenchs latest book midnight and peking
if you like Chinese history and haven't
picked it up yet let me urge you to do
so so far it's great also reading sean
rinds the end of cheap china and finally
my copy of mary Tiffin's Friends of Sir
Robert Hart arrived so that one is in
the queue and I'm sure I'll make it a
podcast one of these days I was in
Kansas City a few days ago was there
visiting a customer but really all I
thought about was being in the same
place as the great one Bob packet my
inspiration for this China history
podcast next time in KC I'm gonna call
Professor Bob and go pay my most humble
respects professor Bob of course is from
history according to Bob oh man we had
some awesome KC barbecue there before we
headed to the airport I took my gang
from China to jack stack and introduce
them to this great all-american
tradition and delicacy they loved it I
for one am definitely gonna go back to
Kansas City again for not only more
barbecue but more importantly to go on a
pilgrimage to see the pod father this is
Laszlo Montgomery signing off once again
from the very edge of Los Angeles County
and lovely Claremont California take
care everyone and it's always one of my
greatest hopes that you'll join me next
time for another episode of the China
history podcast